Heap sort is a comparison-based sorting technique based on Binary Heap data structure.
It is similar to the selection sort where we first find the minimum element and place the
minimum element at the beginning. Repeat the same process for the remaining elements.

In computer science, a heap is a specialized tree-based data structure that satisfies the heap property:
In a max heap, for any given node C, if P is a parent node of C, then the key (the value) of P is
greater than or equal to the key of C. In a min heap, the key of P is less than or equal to the key of C.
The node at the "top" of the heap (with no parents) is called the root node.
Heap Sort Algorithm
To solve the problem follow the below idea:

First convert the array into heap data structure using heapify, then one by one delete the root node
of the Max-heap and replace it with the last node in the heap and then heapify the root of the heap.
Repeat this process until size of heap is greater than 1.

Build a heap from the given input array.
Repeat the following steps until the heap contains only one element:
Swap the root element of the heap (which is the largest element) with the last element of the heap.
Remove the last element of the heap (which is now in the correct position).
Heapify the remaining elements of the heap.
The sorted array is obtained by reversing the order of the elements in the input array.

Complexity Analysis of Heap Sort
Time Complexity: O(N log N)
Auxiliary Space: O(log n), due to the recursive call stack. However, auxiliary space can be O(1)
for iterative implementation.

Important points about Heap Sort:
Heap sort is an in-place algorithm.
Its typical implementation is not stable but can be made stable (See this)
Typically 2-3 times slower than well-implemented QuickSort.  The reason for slowness is a lack of locality of reference.

Advantages of Heap Sort:
Efficient Time Complexity: Heap Sort has a time complexity of O(n log n) in all cases.
This makes it efficient for sorting large datasets.
The log n factor comes from the height of the binary heap, and it ensures that the algorithm maintains good
performance even
with a large number of elements.
Memory Usage – Memory usage can be minimal because apart from what is necessary to hold the initial list of items
to be sorted, it needs no additional memory space to work
Simplicity –  It is simpler to understand than other equally efficient sorting algorithms because it does not use
advanced computer science concepts such as recursion.

Disadvantages of Heap Sort:
Costly: Heap sort is costly.
Unstable: Heap sort is unstable. It might rearrange the relative order.
Efficient: Heap Sort is not very efficient when working with highly complex data.

Frequently Asked Questions Related to Heap Sort
Q1. What are the two phases of Heap Sort?

The heap sort algorithm consists of two phases. In the first phase, the array is converted into a max heap.
And in the second phase, the highest element is removed (i.e., the one at the tree root) and the remaining
elements are used to create a new max heap.

Q2. Why Heap Sort is not stable?

The heap sort algorithm is not a stable algorithm. This algorithm is not stable because the operations that
are performed in a heap can change the relative ordering of the equivalent keys.

Q3. Is Heap Sort an example of the “Divide and Conquer” algorithm?

Heap sort is NOT at all a Divide and Conquer algorithm. It uses a heap data structure to efficiently
sort its element and not a “divide and conquer approach” to sort the elements.

Q4. Which sorting algorithm is better – Heap sort or Merge Sort?

The answer lies in the comparison of their time complexity and space requirements. The Merge sort is
slightly faster than the Heap sort. But on the other hand merge sort takes extra memory.
Depending on the requirement, one should choose which one to use.

Q5. Why is Heap sort better than Selection sort?

Heap sort is similar to selection sort, but with a better way to get the maximum element.
It takes advantage of the heap data structure to get the maximum element in constant time


